CHAPTER  TWO
MOTION IN A STRAIGHT  LINE
2.1 Introduction
2.2 Instantaneous velocity and
speed
2.3 Acceleration
2.4 Kinematic equations for
uniformly accelerated motion
2.5 Relative velocity
Summary
Points to ponder
Exercises2.1  INTRODUCTION
Motion is common to everything in the universe. W e walk,
run and ride a bicycle.  Even when we are sleeping, air moves
into and out of our lungs and blood flows in arteries and
veins.  W e see leaves falling fr om tr ees and water flowing
down a dam.  Automobiles and planes carry people from one
place to the other . The earth r otates once every twenty-four
hours and r evolves r ound the sun once in a year . The sun
itself is in motion in the Milky W ay, which is again moving
within its local group of galaxies.
Motion is change in position of an object with time. How
does the position change with time ? In this chapter , we shall
learn how to describe motion. For this, we develop the
concepts of velocity and acceleration. W e shall confine
ourselves to the study of motion of objects along a straight
line, also known as rectilinear motion . For the case of
rectilinear motion with uniform acceleration, a set of simple
equations can be obtained. Finally, to understand the relative
nature of motion, we introduce the concept of relative velocity.
In our discussions, we shall treat the objects in motion as
point objects. This approximation is valid so far as the size
of the object is much smaller than the distance it moves in a
reasonable duration of time.  In a good number of situations
in real-life, the size of objects can be neglected and they can
be consider ed as point-like objects without much err or.
In Kinematics , we study ways to describe motion without
going into the causes of motion. What causes motion
described in this chapter and the next chapter forms the
subject matter of Chapter 4.
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 14
Table 2.1  Limiting value of ∆
∆x
t at t = 4 s2.2  INSTANTANEOUS VELOCITY AND SPEED
The average velocity tells us how fast an object
has been moving over a given time interval but
does not tell us how fast it moves at different
instants of time during that interval.  For this,
we define  instantaneous velocity  or simply
velocity v at an instant t.
The velocity at an instant is defined as the
limit of the average velocity as the time interval
∆t becomes infinitesimally small. In other words,
v limx
t=
t  0∆ ∆
∆→(2.1a)
  =d
dx
t(2.1b)
where the symbol lim
t0∆→ stands for the operation
of taking limit as  ∆tg0 of the quantity on its
right. In the language of calculus, the quantity
on the right hand side of Eq. (2.1a) is the
differential coefficient of x with respect to t and
is denoted by  d
dx
t (see Appendix 2.1).  It is the
rate of change of position with respect to time,
at that instant.
We can use Eq. (2.1a) for obtaining the
value of velocity at an instant either
graphically  or numerically . Suppose that we
want to obtain graphically the value of
velocity at time  t = 4 s  (point P) for the motion
of the car represented in Fig.2.1 calculation.
Let us take ∆t = 2 s centred at t = 4 s. Then,
by the definition of the average velocity, the
slope of line P1P2  ( Fig. 2.1) gives the value of
average velocity over the interval   3 s to 5 s.Fig. 2.1 Determining velocity from position-time
graph.  V elocity at t = 4 s is the slope of the
tangent to the graph at that instant .
Now, we decrease the value of ∆t from 2 s to 1
s.  Then line P1P2 becomes Q1Q2   and its slope
gives the value of the average velocity over
the interval 3.5 s to 4.5 s. In the limit ∆t → 0,
the line P1P2 become s tangent to the position-
time curve at the point P and the velocity at t
= 4 s is given by the slope of the tangent at
that point. It is difficult to show this
process graphically. But if we use
numerical method to obtain the value of
the velocity, the  meaning of the limiting
process becomes clear . For the graph shown
in Fig. 2. 1, x = 0.08 t3.  Table 2.1 gives the
value of ∆x/∆t calculated for ∆t equal to 2.0 s,
1.0 s, 0.5 s, 0.1 s and 0.01 s centred at t =
4.0 s. The second and third columns give the
value of t1=  tt
2−

∆
 and t tt
22= +

∆
 and the
fourth and the fifth columns give the
Reprint 2025-26
MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE 15⊳corresponding values of x, i.e. x (t1) = 0.08 t13
and x (t2) = 0.08 t23. The sixth column lists the
difference ∆x = x (t2) – x (t1) and the last
column gives the ratio of ∆x and ∆t, i.e. the
average velocity corresponding to the value
of ∆t listed in the first column.
We see fr om T able 2.1 that as we decr ease
the value of ∆t from 2.0 s to 0.010 s, the value of
the average velocity approaches the limiting
value 3.84 m s–1 which is the value of velocity at
t = 4.0 s, i.e. the value of  dx
dt at t = 4.0 s. In this
manner , we can calculate velocity at each
instant for motion of the car .
The graphical method for the determination
of the instantaneous velocity is always not a
convenient method.  For this, we must carefully
plot the position–time graph and calculate the
value of average velocity as ∆t becomes smaller
and smaller .  It is easier to calculate the value
of velocity at different instants if we have data
of positions at different instants or exact
expression for the position as a function of time.
Then, we calculate ∆x/∆t from the data for
decreasing the value of ∆t and find the limiting
value as we have done in Table 2.1 or use
differential calculus for the given expression and
calculate dx
dt at different instants as done in
the following example.
Example 2.1    The position of an object
moving along x-axis is given by   x = a + bt2
where  a = 8.5 m, b = 2.5 m s–2 and t is
measured in seconds. What is its velocity at
t = 0 s and t = 2.0 s. What is the average
velocity between t = 2.0 s and t = 4.0 s ?
Answer  In notation of differential calculus, the
velocity is
( )  2 -1 dx dv a bt 2b t = 5.0 t m sdt dt= = + =
At   t = 0 s,      v = 0 m s–1   and at   t = 2.0 s,
v = 10 m s-1 .
()() 4.0 2.0
4.0 2.0x xAverage velocity−=−16 – – 46.02.0a b a bb+= = ×
      -16.0 2.5 =15 m s= ×             ⊳
Note that for uniform motion, velocity is
the same as the average velocity at all
instants .
Instantaneous speed  or simply speed  is the
magnitude of velocity. For example, a velocity of
+ 24.0 m s–1 and a velocity of – 24.0 m s–1 —
both have an associated speed of 24.0 m s-1.  It
should be noted that though average speed over
a finite interval of time is greater or equal to the
magnitude of the average velocity,
instantaneous speed at an instant is equal to
the magnitude of the instantaneous velocity at
that instant. Why so ?
2.3  ACCELERATION
The velocity of an object, in general, changes
during its course of motion. How to describe
this change? Should it be described as the rate
of change in velocity with distance or with
time ?   This was a problem even in Galileo’s
time. It was first thought that this change could
be described by the rate of change of velocity
with distance. But, through his studies of
motion of freely falling objects and motion of
objects on an inclined plane, Galileo concluded
that the rate of change of velocity with time is
a constant of motion for all objects in free fall.
On the other hand, the change in velocity with
distance is not constant – it decreases with the
increasing distance of fall . This led to the
concept of acceleration as the rate of change
of velocity with time.
 The average acceleration a over a time interval
is defined as the change of velocity divided by
the time interval :
2 1
2 1–
–v v va
t t t∆= =∆(2.2)
where v2 and v1 are the instantaneous velocities
or simply velocities at time  t2 and t1 . It is the
average change of velocity per unit time. The SI
unit of acceleration is m s–2 .
On a plot of velocity versus time, the average
acceleration is the slope of the straight line
connecting the points corresponding to (v2, t2)
and ( v1, t1).
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 16
Fig. 2. 3Velocity–time graph for motions with
constant acceleration. (a) Motion in positive
direction with positive acceleration,
(b) Motion in positive direction with
negative acceleration, (c) Motion in
negative direction with negative
acceleration, (d) Motion of an object with
negative acceleration that changes
direction at time t1.  Between times 0 to
t1, it moves in  positive x - direction
and between t1 and t2 it moves in the
opposite direction .Instantaneous acceleration is defined in the
same way as the instantaneous velocity :
d
d t 0v va limt t Δ →Δ= =Δ(2.3)
The acceleration at an instant is the slope
of the tangent to the v–t curve at that
instant.
Since velocity is a quantity having both
magnitude and direction, a change in
velocity may involve either or both of these
factors.  Acceleration, therefore, may result
from a change in speed (magnitude), a
change in direction or changes in both.  Like
velocity, acceleration can also be positive,
negative or zero.  Position-time graphs for
motion with positive, negative and zero
acceleration are shown in Figs. 2. 4 (a), (b)
and (c), respectively.  Note that the graph
curves upward for positive acceleration;
downward for negative acceleration and it is
a straight line for zero acceleration.
Although acceleration can vary with time,
our study in this chapter will be restricted
to motion with constant acceleration. In this
case, the average acceleration equals the
constant value of acceleration during the
interval. If the velocity of an object is vo at t
= 0 and v at time t, we have
or00
0v va   ,  v v a tt−= = +−        (2.4)
Fig. 2.2 Position-time graph for motion with
(a) positive acceleration; (b) negative
acceleration, and (c) zero acceleration .
Let us see how velocity-time graph looks like
for some simple cases. Fig. 2.3 shows     velocity-
time graph for motion with constant acceleration
for the following cases :
(a)An object is moving in a positive direction
with a positive acceleration.
(b)An object is moving in positive direction
with a negative acceleration.(c)An object is moving in negative direction
with a negative acceleration.
(d)An object is moving in positive direction
till time  t1, and then turns back with the
same negative acceleration.
An interesting feature of a velocity-time
graph for any moving object is that  the area
under the curve represents the
displacement over a given time interval . A
general proof of this statement requires use of
calculus. W e can, however , see that it is true
for the simple case of an object moving with
constant velocity u. Its velocity-time graph is
as shown in Fig. 2. 4.
Reprint 2025-26
MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE 17
Fig. 2.4 Area under v–t curve equals displacement
of the object over a given time interval .
The v-t curve is
 a straight line parallel to the
time axis and the area under it between t = 0
and t = T
  is the area of the rectangle of height u
and base T. Therefore, area = u × T = uT which
is the displacement in this time interval.  How
come in this case an area is equal to a distance?
Think!  Note the dimensions of quantities on
the two coordinate axes, and you will arrive at
the answer .
Note that the x-t, v-t,  and a-t graphs shown
in several figures in this chapter have sharp
kinks at some points implying that the
functions are not differentiable at these
points. In any realistic situation, the
functions will be differentiable at all points
and the graphs will be smooth .
What this means physically is that
acceleration and velocity cannot change
values abruptly at an instant. Changes are
always continuous.
2.4KINEMA TIC E QUATIONS FOR
UNIFORML Y ACCELERA TED MOTION
For uniformly accelerated motion, we can derive
some simple equations that relate displacement
(x), time taken ( t), initial velocity ( v0), final
velocity ( v) and acceleration ( a). Equation (2.4)
already obtained gives a relation between final
and initial velocities v and   v0  of an object moving
with uniform acceleration a :
             v = v0 + at (2.4)
This relation is graphically represented in Fig. 2. 5.
The area under this curve is :
Area between instants 0 and t = Area of triangle
ABC + Area of rectangle OACD
 
( )–0 01v v t + v t2=Fig. 2.5 Area  under v-t curve for an object with
uniform acceleration .
As explained in the previous section, the area
under v-t curve represents the displacement.
Therefore, the displacement x of the object is :
( )1–20 0 x v v t + v t= (2.5)
But0v v a t− =
Therefore,2
01
2x a t + v t=
or,2
01
2x v t at= + (2.6)
Equation (2.5) can also be written as
0
2v + vx t v t= = (2.7a)
where,
0
2v vv+=  (constant acceleration only)
(2.7b)
Equations (2.7a) and  (2.7b) mean that the object
has undergone displacement x with an average
velocity equal to the arithmetic average of the
initial and final velocities.
From Eq. (2.4),  t = (v – v0)/a. Substituting this in
Eq. (2.7a), we get
       x v tv v v v
av v
a= =+

−

=−0 02
02
2 2
     2 2
02 v v ax= + (2.8)
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 18⊳This equation can also be obtained by
substituting the value of t from Eq. (2.4) into Eq.
(2.6). Thus, we have obtained three important
equations :
0v v at= +
         2
01
2x v t at= +
2 2
02 v v ax= + (2.9a)
connecting five quantities v0,  v, a, t  and x.  These
are kinematic equations of rectilinear motion for
constant acceleration.
The set of Eq. (2.9a) were obtained by
assuming that at t = 0, the position of the particle,
x is 0.  W e can obtain a mor e general equation if
we take  the  position coordinate at t = 0 as non-
zero, say x0.  Then Eqs. (2.9a) are modified
(replacing x by x – x0 ) to :
0v v at= +
2
0 01
2x x v t at= + + (2.9b)
2 2
0 0 2 ( ) v v a x x= + − (2.9c)
Example 2.2 Obtain equations of motion
for constant acceleration using method of
calculus.
Answer   By definition
d
dvat=
 dv = a dt
Integrating both sides
d dv a t
vv t
0 0∫ ∫=
=∫a ttd
0         ( a is
constant)
0–v v at=
       0v v at= +
Further ,        d
dxvt=
      dx = v dt
Integrating both sides
dx
xx
0∫=∫v ttd
0
⊳= +( )∫v at tt
00d
2
0 01–2x x v t a t= +
      x   = 2
0 01
2x v t a t+ +
We can write
d d d d
d d d dv v x va vt x t x= = =
or, v dv = a dx
Integrating both sides,
v v a x
vv
xxd d
0 0 ∫ ∫=
()2 2
0
0––2v va x x=
()2 2
0 0 2 – v v a x x= +
The advantage of this method is that it can be used
for motion with non-uniform acceleration
also.
Now, we shall use these equations to some
important cases. ⊳
Example 2.3 A ball is thrown vertically
upwards with a velocity of 20 m s–1 from
the top of a multistorey building. The
height of the point from where the ball is
thrown is 25.0 m from the ground. (a) How
high will the ball rise ?  and (b) how long
will it be before the ball hits the ground?
Take g = 10 m s–2.
Answer   (a) Let us take the y-axis in the
vertically upward direction with zero at the
ground, as shown in Fig. 2.6.
Now  vo = + 20 m s–1,
   a  =  – g = –10 m s–2,
   v  =  0 m s–1
If the ball rises to height y from the point of
launch, then using the equation
()0    2 2
0 v v 2 a y – y= +
we get
0 = (20)2 + 2(–10)( y – y0)
Solving,  we get, ( y – y0) = 20 m.
(b) W e can solve this part of the pr oblem in two
ways.  Note carefully the methods used .
Reprint 2025-26
MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE 19⊳
Fig. 2.6
FIRST METHOD  :  In the first method, we split
the path in two parts : the upward motion  (A to
B) and the downward motion (B to C) and
calculate the corresponding time taken t1 and
t2.  Since the velocity  at B is zero, we have :
                  v  =  vo +  at
0 = 20  – 10 t1
Or,            t1 = 2 s
This is the time in going from A to B.  From B, or
the point of  the maximum height, the ball falls
freely under the acceleration due to gravity.  The
ball is moving in negative y direction.  W e use
equation
          2
0 01
2y y v t at= + +
We have, y0 = 45 m, y = 0, v0 = 0, a = – g  = –10 m s–2
   0  =  45 + (½) (–10) t22
Solving, we get t2 = 3 s
Therefore, the total time taken by the ball before
it hits the ground = t1 +   t2  =  2  s + 3 s = 5 s.
SECOND METHOD  : The total time taken can
also be calculated by noting the coordinates of
initial and final positions of the ball with respect
to the origin chosen and using equation
2
0 01
2y y v t at= + +
Now y0  =  25 m         y  = 0 m
vo = 20 m s-1,a  = –10m s–2, t  =  ?0 = 25  +20 t  + (½)  (-10) t2
Or, 5t2 – 20 t  – 25  =  0
Solving this quadratic equation for t, we get
t = 5s
Note that the second method is better since we
do not have to worry about the path of the motion
as the motion is under constant acceleration.
  ⊳
Example 2.4  Free-fall : Discuss the
motion of an object under free  fall.  Neglect
air resistance.
Answer   An object released near the surface of
the Earth is accelerated downward under the
influence of the force of gravity. The magnitude
of acceleration due to gravity is represented by
g.  If air resistance is neglected, the object is
said to be in free fall . If the height through
which the object falls is small compared to the
earth’s radius, g can be taken to be constant,
equal to   9.8 m s–2. Free fall is thus a case of
motion with uniform acceleration.
We assume that the motion is in y-direction ,
more corre ctly in – y-direction because we
choose upward direction as positive. Since the
acceleration due to gravity is always downward,
it is in the negative direction and we have
a = – g  = – 9.8 m s–2
The object is released from rest at y  = 0. Therefore,
v0 = 0 and the equations of motion become:
v =  0 – g t      = –9.8 t      m s–1
y =  0 – ½  g t2   = –4.9 t2    m
v2 = 0 – 2 g y     = –19.6 y   m2 s–2
These equations give the velocity and the
distance travelled as a function of time and also
the variation of velocity with distance. The
variation of acceleration, velocity, and distance,
with time have been plotted in Fig.  2.7(a), (b)
and (c).
(a)
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 20⊳(b)
      (c)
Fig. 2.7  Motion of an object under free fall.
(a)  V ariation of acceleration with time.
(b) Variation of velocity with time.
(c) Variation of distance with time ⊳
Example 2.5  Galileo’s law of odd
numbers : “The distances traversed, during
equal intervals    of time, by a body falling
from rest, stand to one another in the same
ratio as the odd numbers beginning with
unity [namely, 1: 3: 5: 7…...].”  Prove it.
Answer   Let us divide the time interval of
motion of an object under free fall into many
equal intervals τ  and find out the distancestraversed during successive intervals of
time. Since initial velocity is zero, we have
Using this equation, we can calculate the
position of the object after different time
intervals, 0, τ, 2τ,  3τ… which are given in
second column of Table 2.2. If we take
(–1/
 2) gτ2 as y0 — the position coordinate after
first time interval τ, then third column gives
the positions in the unit of  yo. The fourth
column gives the distances traversed in
successive τs. We find that the distances ar e
in the simple ratio 1: 3: 5: 7: 9: 11… as  shown
in the last column. This  law was established
by Galileo Galilei (1564 -1642) who was the first
to make quantitative studies of free fall. ⊳
Example 2.6  Stopping distance of
vehicles : When brakes are applied to a
moving vehicle, the distance it travels before
stopping is called stopping distance.  It is
an important factor for road safety and
depends on the initial velocity ( v0) and the
braking capacity, or deceleration, – a that
is caused by the braking. Derive an
expression for stopping distance of a vehicle
in terms of vo and a.
Answer   Let the distance travelled by the vehicle
before it stops be ds. Then, using equation of
motion  v2 = vo2 + 2 ax, and noting that  v = 0, we
have the stopping distance
dv
as=–02
2
Thus, the stopping distance is proportional to
the square  of the initial velocity. Doubling the
⊳
Table 2.2y gt= −1
22
Reprint 2025-26
MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE 21⊳initial velocity increases the stopping distance
by a factor of 4 (for the same deceleration).
For  the car of a particular make, the braking
distance was found to be 10 m, 20 m, 34 m and
50 m corresponding to velocities of 11, 15, 20
and 25 m/s which are nearly consistent with
the above formula.
Stopping distance is an important factor
considered in setting speed limits, for example,
in school zones. ⊳
Example 2.7  Reaction time :  When a
situation demands our immediate
action, it takes some time before we
really respond. Reaction time is the
time a person takes to observe, think
and act.  For example, if a person is
driving and suddenly a boy appears on
the road, then the time elapsed before
he slams the brakes of the car is the
reaction time. Reaction time depends
on complexity of the situation and on
an individual.
You can measur e your r eaction
time by a simple experiment. Take a
ruler and ask your friend to drop it
vertically through the gap between
your thumb and forefinger (Fig. 2.8).
After you catch it, find the distance d
travelled by the ruler . In a particular
case, d was found to be 21.0 cm.
Estimate reaction time.Answer   The ruler drops under free fall.
Therefore, vo = 0, and a = –g = –9.8 m s–2. The
distance travelled d and the reaction time tr are
related by
Or,
Given d = 21.0 cm and g = 9.8 m s–2  the reaction
time is
⊳
Fig. 2.8    Measuring the reaction time.
SUMMARY
1.An object is said to be in motion  if its position changes with time.  The position of the
object can be specified with reference to a conveniently chosen origin.  For motion in
a straight line, position to the right of the origin is taken as positive and to the left as
negative.
The average speed of an object is greater or equal to the magnitude of the average
velocity over a given time interval.
2.Instantaneous velocity  or simply velocity is defined as the limit of the average velocity
as the time interval ∆t becomes infinitesimally small :
d
d t 0 t 0x xv lim v limt t ∆ → ∆ →∆= = =∆
The velocity at a particular instant is equal to the slope of the tangent drawn on
position-time graph at that instant.
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 22
3.Average acceleration  is the change in velocity divided by the time interval during which
the change occurs :
vat∆=∆
4.Instantaneous acceleration  is defined as the limit of the average acceleration as the
time interval ∆t goes to zero :
d
d t 0 t 0v va lim a limt t ∆ → ∆ →∆= = =∆
The acceleration of an object at a particular time is the slope of the velocity-time
graph at that instant of time.  For uniform motion, acceleration is zero and the x-t
graph is a straight line inclined to the time axis and the v-t graph is a straight line
parallel to the time axis. For motion with uniform acceleration, x-t graph is a parabola
while the v-t graph is a straight line inclined to the time axis.
5.The area under the velocity-time curve between times t1 and t2 is equal to the displacement
of the object during that interval of time.
6.For objects in uniformly accelerated rectilinear motion, the five quantities, displacement
x, time taken t, initial velocity v0, final velocity v and acceleration a are related by a set
of simple equations called kinematic equations of motion :
        v = v0 +  at
       x v t1
2at02= +
        v v 2ax2
02= +
if the position of the object at time t = 0 is 0.  If the particle starts at x = x0 , x in above
equations is replaced by ( x – x0).
Reprint 2025-26
MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE 23
POINTS TO PONDER
1.The origin and the positive dir ection of an axis ar e a matter of choice. Y ou should first specify
this choice before you assign signs to quantities like displacement, velocity and acceleration.
2.If a particle is speeding up, acceleration is in the direction of velocity; if its speed is
decreasing, acceleration is in the direction opposite to that of the velocity.  This
statement is independent of the choice of the origin and the axis.
3.The sign of acceleration does not tell us whether the particle’s speed is increasing or
decreasing.  The sign of acceleration (as mentioned in point 3) depends on the choice
of the positive direction of the axis.  For example, if the vertically upward direction is
chosen to be the positive direction of the axis, the acceleration due to gravity is
negative.  If a particle is falling under gravity, this acceleration, though negative,
results in increase in speed.  For a particle thrown upward, the same negative
acceleration (of gravity) results in decrease in speed.
4.The zero velocity of a particle at any instant does not necessarily imply zero acceleration
at that instant.  A particle may be momentarily at rest and yet have non-zero acceleration.
For example, a particle thrown up has zero velocity at its uppermost point but the
acceleration at that instant continues to be the acceleration due to gravity.
5.In the kinematic equations of motion [Eq. (2.9)], the various quantities are algebraic,
i.e. they may be positive or negative.  The equations are applicable in all situations
(for one dimensional motion with constant acceleration) provided the values of different
quantities are substituted in the equations with proper signs.
6.The definitions of instantaneous velocity and acceleration (Eqs. (2.1) and (2.3)) are
exact and are always correct while the kinematic equations (Eq. (2.9)) are true only for
motion in which the magnitude and the direction of acceleration are constant during
the course of motion.
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 24
EXERCISES
2.1 In which of the following examples of motion, can the body be considered
approximately a point object:
(a)a railway carriage moving without jerks between two stations.
(b)a monkey sitting on top of a man cycling smoothly on a circular track.
(c)a spinning cricket ball that turns sharply on hitting the ground.
(d)a tumbling beaker that has slipped off the edge of a table.
2.2 The position-time ( x-t) graphs for two children A and B returning from their school
O to their homes P and Q respectively are shown in Fig. 2.9. Choose the correct
entries in the brackets below ;
(a)(A/B) lives closer to the school than (B/A)
(b)(A/B) starts from the school earlier than (B/A)
(c)(A/B) walks faster than (B/A)
(d)A and B reach home at the (same/different) time
(e)(A/B) overtakes (B/A) on the road (once/twice).
2.3 A woman starts from her home at 9.00 am, walks with a speed of 5 km h–1 on a
straight road up to her office 2.5 km away, stays at the office up to 5.00 pm, and
returns home by an auto with a speed of 25 km h–1. Choose suitable scales and
plot the x-t graph of her motion.
2.4 A drunkard walking in a narrow lane takes 5 steps forward and 3 steps backward,
followed again by 5 steps forward and 3 steps backward, and so on. Each step is 1 m
long and requires 1 s. Plot the x-t graph of his motion. Determine graphically and
otherwise how long the drunkard takes to fall in a pit 13 m away from the start.
2.5 A car moving along a straight highway with speed of 126 km h–1 is brought to a
stop within a distance of 200 m. What is the retardation of the car (assumed
uniform), and how long does it take for the car to stop ?
2.6 A player throws a ball upwards with an initial speed of 29.4 m s–1.
(a)What is the direction of acceleration during the upward motion of the ball ?
(b)What are the velocity and acceleration of the ball at the highest point of its motion ?
(c)Choose the x = 0 m and t = 0 s to be the location and time of the ball at its
highest point, vertically downward direction to be the positive direction of
x-axis, and give the signs of position, velocity and acceleration of the ball
during its upward, and downward motion.
(d)To what height does the ball rise and after how long does the ball return to the
player’s hands ? (Take g = 9.8 m s–2 and neglect air resistance).
2.7 Read each statement below carefully and state with reasons and examples, if it is
true or false ;
            A particle in one-dimensional motion
(a)with zero speed at an instant may have non-zero acceleration at that instant
(b)with zero speed may have non-zero velocity,
(c)with constant speed must have zero acceleration,
(d)with positive value of acceleration must  be speeding up.Fig. 2.9
Reprint 2025-26
MOTION IN A STRAIGHT LINE 25
2.8 A ball is dr opped fr om a height of 90 m on a floor . At each collision with the floor ,
the ball loses one tenth of its speed. Plot the speed-time graph of its motion
between t = 0 to 12 s.
2.9 Explain clearly, with examples, the distinction between :
(a)magnitude of displacement (sometimes called distance) over an interval of time,
and the total length of path covered by a particle over the same interval;
(b)magnitude of average velocity over an interval of time, and the average speed
over the same interval. [Average speed of a particle over an interval of time is
defined as the total path length divided by the time interval]. Show in both (a)
and (b) that the second quantity
is either greater than or equal to
the first. When is the equality sign
true ? [For simplicity, consider
one-dimensional motion only].
2.10 A man walks on a straight road from
his home to a market 2.5 km away with
a speed of 5 km h–1. Finding the
market closed, he instantly turns and
walks back home with a speed of 7.5
km h–1. What is the
(a)magnitude of average velocity, and
(b)average speed of the man over the
interval of time (i) 0 to 30 min, (ii)
0 to 50 min, (iii) 0 to 40 min ?
[Note: Y ou will appr eciate from this
exercise why it is better to define
average speed as total path length
divided by time, and not as
magnitude of average velocity. Y ou
would not like to tell the tired man
on his return home that his
average speed was zero !]
2.11 In Exercises 2.9 and 2.10, we have
carefully distinguished between
average speed and magnitude of average
velocity. No such distinction is necessary when
we consider instantaneous speed and
magnitude of velocity. The instantaneous speed
is always equal to the magnitude of
instantaneous velocity. Why?
2.12 Look at the graphs (a) to (d) (Fig. 2.10) carefully
and state, with reasons, which of these cannot
possibly represent one-dimensional motion of
a particle.
2.13 Figure 2.11shows the x-t plot of one-
dimensional motion of a particle. Is it correct
to say from the graph that the particle moves
in a straight line for    t < 0 and on a parabolic
path for t >0 ? If not, suggest a suitable physical
context for this graph.
2.14 A police van moving on a highway with a speed of
30 km h–1 fires a bullet at a thief’s car speeding away in
the same direction with a speed of 192 km h–1. If the muzzle
speed of the bullet is 150 m s–1, with what speed does the
bullet hit the thief’s car ? (Note: Obtain that speed which
is relevant for damaging the thief’s car).Fig. 2.10
        Fig. 2.11
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 26
2.15 Suggest a suitable physical situation for each of the following graphs (Fig 2.12):
Fig. 2.12
2.16 Figure 2.13 gives the x-t plot of a particle executing one-dimensional simple
harmonic motion. (Y ou will lear n about this motion in mor e detail in Chapter13).
Give the signs of position, velocity and acceleration variables of the particle at
t = 0.3 s, 1.2 s, – 1.2 s.
Fig. 2.13
2.17 Figure 2.14 gives the x-t plot of a
particle in one-dimensional motion.
Three different equal intervals of time
are shown. In which interval is the
average speed greatest, and in which
is it the least ?  Give the sign of average
velocity for each interval.
2.18 Figure 2.15  gives a speed-time graph of
a particle in motion along a constant
direction. Three equal intervals of time
are shown. In which interval is the
average acceleration greatest in
magnitude? In which interval is the
average speed greatest ? Choosing the
positive direction as the constant
direction of motion, give the signs of v
and a in the three intervals. What are
the accelerations at the points A, B, C
and D ?Fig. 2.14
Fig. 2.15
Reprint 2025-26
