CHAPTER  THIRTEEN
OSCILLATIONS
13.1 INTRODUCTION
In our daily life we come across various kinds of motions.
You have alr eady lear nt about some of them, e.g., r ectilinear
motion and motion of a projectile. Both these motions are
non-r epetitive. W e have also lear nt about unifor m cir cular
motion and orbital motion of planets in the solar system. In
these cases, the motion is repeated after a certain interval of
time, that is, it is periodic. In your childhood, you must have
enjoyed rocking in a cradle or swinging on a swing. Both
these motions are repetitive in nature but different from the
periodic motion of a planet. Here, the object moves to and fro
about a mean position. The pendulum of a wall clock executes
a similar motion. Examples of such periodic to and fro
motion abound: a boat tossing up and down in a river , the
piston in a steam engine going back and forth, etc. Such a
motion is termed as oscillatory motion. In this chapter we
study this motion.
The study of oscillatory motion is basic to physics; its
concepts are required for the understanding of many physical
phenomena. In musical instruments, like the sitar , the guitar
or the violin, we come across vibrating strings that produce
pleasing sounds. The membranes in drums and diaphragms
in telephone and speaker systems vibrate to and fro about
their mean positions. The vibrations of air molecules make
the propagation of sound possible. In a solid, the atoms vibrate
about their equilibrium positions, the average energy of
vibrations being proportional to temperature. AC power
supply give voltage that oscillates alternately going positive
and negative about the mean value (zero).
The description of a periodic motion, in general, and
oscillatory motion, in particular , requires some fundamental
concepts, like period, frequency, displacement, amplitude
and phase. These concepts are developed in the next section.13.1 Introduction
13.2 Periodic and oscillatory
motions
13.3 Simple harmonic motion
13.4 Simple harmonic motion
and uniform circular
motion
13.5 Velocity and acceleration
in simple harmonic motion
13.6 Force law for simple
harmonic motion
13.7 Energy in simple harmonic
motion
13.8 The simple pendulum
Summary
Points to ponder
Exercises
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 260
13.2 PERIODIC AND OSCILLATORY MOTIONS
Fig. 13.1 shows some periodic motions. Suppose
an insect climbs up a ramp and falls down, it
comes back to the initial point and repeats the
process identically. If you draw a graph of its
height above the ground versus time, it would
look something like Fig. 13.1 (a). If a child climbs
up a step, comes down, and repeats the process
identically, its height above the ground would
look like that in Fig. 13.1 (b). When you play the
game of bouncing a ball off the ground, between
your palm and the ground, its height versus time
graph would look like the one in Fig. 13.1 (c).
Note that both the curved parts in Fig. 13.1 (c)
are sections of a parabola given by the Newton’s
equation of motion (see section 2.6),
21
2 +gt h = ut  for downward motion, and
21
2 –gt h = ut  for upward motion,
with different values of u in each case. These
are examples of periodic motion. Thus, a motion
that repeats itself at regular intervals of time is
called periodic motion.
Fig. 1 3.1Examples of periodic motion. The period T
is shown in each case.Very often, the body under going periodic
motion has an equilibrium position somewhere
inside its path. When the body is at this position
no net external force acts on it. Therefore, if it is
left ther e at r est, it r emains ther e forever. If the
body is given a small displacement from the
position, a force comes into play which tries to
bring the body back to the equilibrium point,
giving rise to oscillations  or vibrations . For
example, a ball placed in a bowl will be in
equilibrium at the bottom. If displaced a little
from the point, it will perform oscillations in the
bowl. Every oscillatory motion is periodic, but
every periodic motion need not be oscillatory.
Circular motion is a periodic motion, but it is
not oscillatory.
There is no significant difference between
oscillations and vibrations. It seems that when
the frequency is small, we call it oscillation (like,
the oscillation of a branch of a tree), while when
the frequency is high, we call it vibration (like,
the vibration of a string of a musical instrument).
Simple harmonic motion is the simplest form
of oscillatory motion. This motion arises when
the force on the oscillating body is directly
proportional to its displacement from the mean
position, which is also the equilibrium position.
Further , at any point in its oscillation, this force
is directed towards the mean position.
In practice, oscillating bodies eventually
come to rest at their equilibrium positions
because of the damping due to friction and other
dissipative causes.  However , they can be for ced
to remain oscillating by means of some external
periodic agency.  W e discuss the phenomena of
damped and forced oscillations later in the
chapter .
Any material medium can be pictured as a
collection of a large number of coupled
oscillators. The collective oscillations of the
constituents of a medium manifest themselves
as waves. Examples of waves include water
waves, seismic waves, electromagnetic waves.
We shall study the wave phenomenon in the next
chapter .
13.2.1 Period and frequency
We have seen that any motion that r epeats itself
at regular intervals of time is called periodic
motion . The smallest interva l of time after
which the motion is repeated is called its
period . Let us denote the period by the symbol
T. Its SI unit is second. For periodic motions,(a)
(b)
(c)
Reprint 2025-26
OSCILLATIONS 261
which are either too fast or too slow on the scale
of seconds, other convenient units of time are
used. The period of vibrations of a quartz crystal
is expressed in units of microseconds (10–6 s)
abbreviated as µs. On the other hand, the orbital
period of the planet Mercury is 88 earth days.
The Halley’s comet appears after every 76 years.
The reciprocal of T gives the number of
repetitions that occur per unit time. This
quantity is called the frequency of the periodic
motion . It is represented by the symbol ν. The
relation between ν and T is
ν  = 1/T  (13.1)
The unit of ν is thus s–1. After the discoverer of
radio waves, Heinrich Rudolph Hertz (1857 –1894),
a special name has been given to the unit of
frequency. It is called hertz (abbreviated as Hz).
Thus,
1 hertz  = 1 Hz =1 oscillation per second =1 s–1
 (13.2)
Note, that the frequency, ν, is not necessarily
an integer .
uExample 13.1  On an average, a human
heart is found to beat 75 times in a minute.
Calculate its frequency and period.
Answer   The beat frequency of heart = 75/(1 min)
     = 75/(60 s)
                                                    = 1.25 s–1
                                                    = 1.25 Hz
             The time period T         = 1/(1.25 s–1)
                                                    = 0.8 s⊳
13.2.2   Displacement
In section 3.2, we defined displacement of a
particle as t he change in its position vector . In
this chapter , we use the ter m displacement
in a more general sense. It refers to change
with time of any physical property under
consideration. For example, in case of rectilinear
motion of a steel ball on a surface, the distance
from the starting point as a function of time is
its position displacement. The choice of origin
is a matter of convenience. Consider a block
attached to a spring, the other end of the spring
is fixed to a rigid wall [see Fig.13.2(a)]. Generally,
it is convenient to measure displacement of the
body from its equilibrium position. For  an
oscillating simple pendulum, the angle from the
vertical as a function of time may be regardedas a displacement variable [see Fig.13.2(b)]. The
term displacement is not always to be referred
Fig. 13.2(a) A block attached to a spring, the other
end of which is fixed to a rigid wall. The
block moves on a frictionless surface. The
motion of the block can be described in
terms of its distance or displacement x
from the equilibrium position .
Fig.13.2(b) An oscillating simple pendulum; its
motion can be described in terms of
angular displacement θ from the vertical.
in the context of position only. There can be
many other kinds of displacement variables. The
voltage acr oss a capacitor , changing with time
in an AC circuit, is also a displacement variable.
In the same way, pressure variations in time in
the propagation of sound wave, the changing
electric and magnetic fields in a light wave are
examples of displacement in different contexts.
The displacement variable may take both
positive and negative values. In experiments on
oscillations, the displacement is measured for
different times.
The displacement can be represented by a
mathematical function of time. In case of periodic
motion, this function is periodic in time. One of
the simplest periodic functions is given by
    f(t) = A cos ωt (13.3a)
If the argument of this function, ωt, is
increased by an integral multiple of 2 π radians,
the value of the function remains the same. The
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 262
function f(t) is then periodic and its period, T,
is given by
    ωπ2=  T     (13.3b)
Thus, the function f (t) is periodic with period T,
f(t) = f(t+T)
The same result is obviously correct if we
consider a sine function, f(t) = A sin ωt. Further ,
a linear combination of sine and cosine functions
like,
       f(t)  =  A sin ωt + B cos ωt                 (13.3c)
is also a periodic function with the same period
T. Taking,
A = D cos φ  and  B = D sin φ
Eq. (13.3c) can be written as,
f(t) = D sin (ωt + φ ) ,                        (13.3d)
Here D and φ are constant given by
2 2 1and tanφ =  –D = A + B    B
A


The great importance of periodic sine and
cosine functions is due to a remarkable result
proved by the French mathematician, Jean
Baptiste Joseph Fourier (1768–1830): Any
periodic function can be expressed as a
superposition of sine and cosine functions
of different time periods with suitable
coefficients .
uExample 13.2    Which of the following
functions of time represent (a) periodic and
(b) non-periodic motion? Give the period for
each case of periodic motion [ ω is any
positive constant].
(i)sin ωt + cos ωt
(ii)sin ωt + cos 2 ωt + sin 4 ωt
(iii)e–ωt
(iv)log (ωt)
Answer
(i)sin ωt + cos ωt is a periodic function, it can
also be written as 2 sin ( ωt + π/4).
Now 2 sin ( ωt + π/4)= 2 sin ( ωt + π/4+2 π)
       = 2 sin [ ω (t + 2 π/ω) + π/4]
The periodic time of the function is 2 π/ω.(ii)This is an example of a periodic motion. It
can be noted that each term represents a
periodic function with a different angular
frequency. Since period is the least interval
of time after which a function repeats its
value, sin ωt has a period T0= 2π/ω; cos 2 ωt
has a period π/ω =T0/2; and sin 4 ωt has a
period 2 π/4ω = T0/4. The period of the first
term is a multiple of the periods of the last
two terms. Therefore, the smallest interval
of time after which the sum of the three
terms repeats is T0, and thus, the sum is a
periodic function with a period 2 π/ω.
(iii)The function e–ωt is not periodic, it
decreases monotonically with increasing
time and tends to zero as t → ∞ and thus,
never repeats its value.
(iv)The function lo g(ωt) increases
monotonically with time t. It, therefore,
never repeats its value and is a non-
periodic function. It may be noted that as
t → ∞, log( ωt) diverges to ∞. It, therefore,
cannot represent any kind of physical
displacement.               ⊳
13.3 SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION
Consider a particle oscillating back and forth
about the origin of an x-axis between the limits
+A and – A as shown in Fig. 13.3. This oscillatory
motion is said to be simple harmonic if the
displacement x of the particle from the origin
varies with time as :
x (t) = A cos ( ω t + φ) (13.4)
Fig. 13.3 A particle vibrating back and forth about
the origin of x-axis, between the limits +A
and –A.
where A, ω and φ are constants.
Thus, simple harmonic motion (SHM) is not
any periodic motion but one in which
displacement is a sinusoidal function of time.
Fig. 13.4 shows the positions of a particle
executing SHM at discrete value of time, each
interval of time being T/4, where T is the period
of motion. Fig. 13.5 plots the graph of x versus t,
which gives the values of displacement as a
continuous function of time. The quantities A,
Reprint 2025-26
OSCILLATIONS 263
ω and φ which characterize a given SHM have
standard names, as summarised in Fig. 13.6.
Let us understand these quantities.
The amplitutde A of SHM is the magnitude
of maximum displacement of the particle.
[Note, A can be taken to be positive withoutany loss of generality]. As the cosine function
of time varies from +1 to –1, the displacement
varies between the extremes A and – A. Two
simple harmonic motions may have same ω
and φ but different amplitudes A and B , as
shown in Fig. 1 3.7 (a).
While the amplitude A is fixed for a given
SHM, the state of motion (position and velocity)
of the particle at any time t  is determined by the
Fig. 13.4 The location of the particle in SHM at the
discr ete values t = 0, T/4, T/2, 3T/4, T ,
5T/4. The time after which motion repeats
itself is T . T will r emain fixed, no matter
what location you choose as the initial (t =
0) location. The speed is maximum for zero
displacement (at x = 0) and zero at the
extremes of motion.
Fig. 13.5 Displacement as a continuous function of
time for simple harmonic motion.
Fig. 13.7 (b) A plot obtained from Eq. (13 .4). The
curves 3 and 4 are for φ = 0 and - π/4
respectively. The amplitude A is same for
both the plots .Fig. 13.7 (a) A plot of displacement as a function of
time as obtained from Eq. (14.4) with
φ = 0. The curves 1 and 2 are for two
different amplitudes A and B.
x (t):displacement x as a function of time t
A :amplitude
ω :angular frequency
ωt + φ:phase (time-dependent)
φ :phase constant
Fig. 1 3.6  The meaning of standard symbols
in Eq. (13.4)argument ( ωt + φ) in the cosine function. This
time-dependent quantity, ( ωt + φ) is called the
phase  of the motion. The value of plase at t = 0
is φ and is called the phase constant  (or phase
angle ). If the amplitude is known, φ can be
determined from the displacement at t = 0. Two
simple harmonic motions may have the same A
and ω but different phase angle φ, as shown in
Fig. 13.7 (b).
Finally, the quantity ω can be seen to be
related to the period of motion T. Taking, for
simplicity, φ = 0 in Eq. (13.4), we have
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 264
x(t) = A cos ωt   (13.5)
Since the motion has a period T, x (t) is equal to
x (t + T). That is,
A cos ωt = A cos ω (t + T)     (13.6)
Now the cosine function is periodic with period
2π, i.e., it first repeats itself when the argument
changes by 2 π. Therefore,
ω(t + T ) = ωt + 2 π
that is ω = 2π/ T (13.7)
ω is called the angular frequency of SHM. Its
S.I. unit is radians per second. Since the
frequency of oscillations is simply 1/T, ω is 2 π
times the frequency of oscillation. Two simple
harmonic motions may have the same A and φ,
but different ω, as seen in Fig. 13.8. In this plot
the curve (b) has half the period and twice the
frequency of the curve (a).This function represents a simple harmonic
motion having a period T = 2 π/ω and a
phase angle (– π/4) or (7 π/4)
(b)sin2 ωt
= ½ – ½ cos 2 ωt
The function is periodic having a period
T = π/ω. It also represents a harmonic
motion with the point of equilibrium
occurring at ½ instead of zero.                      ⊳
13.4  SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION AND
UNIFORM CIRCULAR MOTION
In this section,  we show that the projection of
uniform circular motion on a diameter of the
circle follows simple harmonic motion. A
simple experiment (Fig.  13.9) helps us visuali se
this connection.  Tie a ball to the end of a string
and make it move in a horizontal plane about
a fixed point with a constant angular speed.
The ball would then perform a uniform circular
motion in the horizontal plane. Observe the
ball sideways or from the front, fixing your
attention in the plane of motion. The ball will
appear to execute to and fro motion along a
horizontal line with the point of rotation as
the midpoint. Y ou could alter natively observe
the shadow of the ball on a wall which is
perpendicular to the plane of the circle. In this
process what we are observing is the motion
of the ball on a diameter of the circle normal
to the direction of viewing.
Fig. 13.9 Circular motion of a ball in a plane viewed
edge-on is SHM.Fig. 13.8    Plots of Eq. (13.4) for φ  = 0 for two different
periods.
uExample  13.3  Which of the following
functions of time represent (a) simple
harmonic motion and (b) periodic but not
simple harmonic? Give the period for each
case.
(1)sin ωt – cos ωt
(2)sin2 ωt
Answer
(a)sin ωt – cos ωt
= sin ωt – sin ( π/2 – ωt)
= 2 cos ( π/4)  sin ( ωt – π/4)
                   = √2 sin ( ωt – π/4)Fig. 13.10 describes the same situation
mathematically. Suppose a particle P is moving
uniformly on a circle of radius A with angular
speed ω. The sense of rotation is anticlockwise.
The initial position vector of the particle, i.e.,
the vector OP at t = 0 makes an angle of φ with
the positive direction of x-axis. In time t, it will
cover a further angle ωt and its position vector
Reprint 2025-26
OSCILLATIONS 265
will make an angle of ωt + φ with the +ve
x-axis. Next , consider the projection of the
position vector OP on the x-axis. This will be
OP′. The position of P ′ on the x-axis, as the
particle P moves on the circle, is given by
x(t) =  A cos ( ωt + φ)
which is the defining equation of SHM. This
shows  that if P moves uniformly on a circle,
its projection P′ on a diameter of the circle
executes SHM. The particle P and the circle
on which it moves ar e sometimes referred to
as the reference particle  and the reference circle ,
respectively.
We can take pr ojection of the motion of P on
any diameter , say the y-axis. In that case, the
displacement y(t) of P′ on the y-axis is given by
y = A sin ( ωt + φ)
which is also an SHM of the same amplitude
as that of the projection on x-axis, but differing
by a phase of π/2.
In spite of this connection between circular
motion and SHM, the force acting on a particle
in linear simple harmonic motion is very
different from the centripetal force needed to
keep a particle in uniform circular motion.uExample 13.4    The figure given below
depicts two circular motions. The radius
of the circle, the period of revolution, the
initial position and the sense of revolution
are indicated in the figures. Obtain the
simple harmonic motions of the
x-projection of the radius vector of the
rotating particle P in each case.
Answer
(a)At t = 0, OP makes an angle of 45o = π/4 rad
with the (positive direction o f) x-axis. After
time t, it covers an angle tTπ2 in the
anticlockwise sense, and makes an angle
of  4 +  2 π πtT  with the x-axis.
The projection of OP on the x-axis at time t
is given by,
x (t) = A cos 2 + 4π π
Tt


For T = 4 s,
x(t) = A cos  2
4 + 4π πt


which is a SHM of amplitude A, period 4 s,
and an initial phase* = 
4π
 .
*The natural unit of angle is radian, defined through the ratio of arc to radius. Angle is a dimensionless
quantity. Therefore it is not always necessary to mention the unit ‘radian’ when we use π, its multiples
or submultiples. The conversion between radian and degree is not similar to that between met re and
centimetre or mile. If the argument of a trigonometric function is stated without units, it is understood
that the unit is radian. On the other hand, if degree is to be used as the unit of angle, then it must be
shown explicit ly. For example, sin(150) means sine of 15 degree, but sin(15) means sine of 15 radians.
Hereafter , we will often dr op ‘rad’ as the unit, and it should be understood that whenever angle is
mentioned as a numerical value, without units, it is to be taken as radians.Fig. 13.10
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 266
(b)In this case at t = 0, OP makes an angle of
90o = 
2π with the x-axis. After a time t, it
covers an angle of 2tTπ in the clockwise
sense and makes an angle of  π π
2  2−

Tt
with the x-axis. The projection of OP on the
x-axis at time t is given by
x(t) = B cos π π
2  2−

Tt
= B sin 2π
Tt


For T = 30 s,
           x(t) = B sin π
15t


Writing this as x (t) = B cos π π
15  2t−

, and
comparing with Eq. (1 3.4).  W e find that this
represents a SHM of amplitu de B, period  30 s,
and an initial phase of 2π−.⊳
13.5 VELOCITY AND ACCELERATION IN
SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION
The speed of a particle v in uniform circular
motion is its angular speed ω times the radius
of the circle A.
v = ω A      (13.8)
The direction of velocity v at a time t is along
the tangent to the circle at the point where the
particle is located at that instant. From the
geometry of Fig. 13.11, it is clear that the velocity
of the projection particle P ′ at time t is
v(t) = – ωA sin ( ωt + φ )              (13.9)where the negative sign shows that v (t) has a
direction opposite to the positive direction of
x-axis. Eq. (13.9) gives the instantaneous
velocity of a particle executing SHM, where
displacement is given by Eq. (13.4). W e can, of
course, obtain this equation without using
geometrical argument, directly by differentiating
(Eq. 13.4) with respect of t:
d( )dv(t) = x tt(13.10)
The method of reference circle can be similarly
used for obtaining instantaneous acceleration
of a particle under going SHM. W e know that the
centripetal acceleration of a particle P in uniform
circular motion has a magnitude v2/A or ω2A,
and it is directed towards the centre i.e., the
direction is along PO. The instantaneous
acceleration of the projection particle P ′ is then
(See Fig. 13.12)
a (t)  = – ω2A cos ( ωt + φ)
               = – ω2x (t) (13.11)
Fig. 13.11 The velocity, v (t), of the particle P ′ is
the projection of the velocity v of the
reference particle, P .Fig. 13.12 The acceleration, a(t), of the particle P ′ is
the projection of the acceleration a of the
reference particle P .
Eq. (13.11) gives the acceleration of a particle
in SHM. The same equation can again be
obtained directly by differentiating velocity v(t)
given by Eq. (13.9) with respect to time:
d( ) ( )da t  = v tt(13.12)
We note fr om Eq. (13.11) the important
property that acceleration of a particle in SHM
is proportional to displacement. For x( t) > 0,
a(t) < 0 and for  x(t) < 0, a(t) > 0. Thus,  whatever
Reprint 2025-26
OSCILLATIONS 267
the value of x between – A and A, the acceleration
a(t) is always directed towards the centre.
For simplicity, let us put φ = 0 and write the
expression for x (t), v (t) and a(t)
x(t) = A cos ωt, v(t) = – ω Asin ωt, a(t)=–ω2 A cos ωt
The corresponding plots are shown in Fig. 13.13.
All quantities vary sinusoidally with time; only
their maxima differ and the different plots differ
in phase. x varies between – A to A; v(t) varies
from – ωA to ωA and a(t) from – ω2A to ω2A. With
respect to displacement plot, velocity plot has a
phase difference of π/2 and acceleration plot has
a phase difference of π.(b)Using Eq. (13.9), the speed of the body
= – (5.0 m)(2 π s–1) sin [(2 π s–1) ×1.5 s
+ π/4]
= – (5.0 m)(2 π s–1) sin [(3 π + π/4)]
       = 1 0π × 0.707 m s–1
       = 22 m s–1
(c)Using Eq.(13.10), the acceleration of the
body
= –(2 π s–1)2 × displacement
           = – (2 π s–1)2 × (–3.535 m)
           = 140 m s–2⊳
13.6 FORCE LAW FOR SIMPLE HARMONIC
MOTION
Using Newton’s second law of motion, and the
expression for acceleration of a particle
undergoing SHM (Eq. 13.11), the force acting
on a particle of mass m in SHM is
F (t)  = ma
    = –mω2 x (t)
i.e.,F (t)  = –k x (t) (13.13)
where  k = m ω2(13.14a)
or ω =  k
m(13.14b)
Like acceleration, force is always directed
towards the mean position—hence it is sometimes
called the restoring force in SHM. To summari se
the discussion so far , simple har monic motion can
be defined in two equivalent ways, either by Eq.
(13.4) for displacement or by Eq. (1 3.13) that gives
its force law. Going from Eq. (1 3.4) to Eq. (1 3.13)
required us to differentiate two times. Likewise ,
by integrating the force law Eq. (1 3.13) two times,
we can get back Eq. (1 3.4).
Note that the force in Eq. (13.13) is linearly
proportional to x(t). A particle oscillating under
such a force is, therefore, calling a linear
harmonic oscillator . In the r eal world, the for ce
may contain small additional terms proportional
to x2, x3, etc. These then are called non-linear
oscillators.
uExample 13.6  Two identical springs of
spring constant k are attached to a block
of mass m and to fixed supports as shown
in Fig. 13.14. Show that when the mass is
displaced from its equilibrium position on
either side, it executes a simple harmonic
motion. Find the period of oscillations.Fig. 1 3.13Displacement, velocity and acceleration of
a particle in simple harmonic motion have
the same period T , but they dif fer in phase
uExample 13.5   A body oscillates with SHM
according to the equation (in SI units),
     x = 5 cos [2 π t + π/4].
At t = 1.5 s, calculate the (a) displacement,
(b) speed and (c) acceleration of the body.
Answer  The angular frequency ω of the body
= 2π s–1 and its time period T = 1 s.
At t = 1.5 s
(a)displacement = (5.0 m) cos [(2 π s–1)×
1.5 s + π/4]
= (5.0 m) cos [(3 π + π/4)]
= –5.0  × 0.707 m
= –3.535 m
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 268
Fig. 13.14
Answer  Let the mass be displaced by a small
distance x to the right side of the equilibrium
position, as shown in Fig. 13.15. Under this
situation the spring on the left side gets
Fig. 13.15
elongated by a length equal to x and that on
the right side gets compressed by the same
length. The forces acting on the mass are
then,
F1   = –k x (force exerted by the spring on
the left side, trying to pull the
mass towards the mean
position)
F2   =  –kx (force exerted by the spring on
the right side, trying to push the
mass towards the mean
position)
The net for ce, F, acting on the mass is then
given by,
F   = –2kx
Hence the force acting on the mass is
proportional to the displacement and is directed
towards the mean position; therefore, the motion
executed by the mass is simple harmonic. The
time period of oscillations is,
T = 2  m
2kπ
⊳13.7 ENERGY IN SIMPLE HARMONIC MOTION
Both kinetic and potential energies of a particle
in SHM vary  between zero and their maximum
values.
In section 13.5 we have seen that the velocity
of a particle executing SHM, is a periodic
function of time. It is zero at the extreme positions
of displacement. Therefore, the kinetic energy ( K)
of such a particle,  which is defined as
2
21mv  =  K
2 2 2 1sin ( + )2= m A  t  ω ω φ
2 1sin ( + )22=  k A t ω φ     (13.15)
is also a periodic function of time, being zero
when the displacement is maximum and
maximum when the particle is at the mean
position. Note, since  the sign of v is immaterial
in K, the period of K is T/2.
What is the potential energy ( U) of a particle
executing simple harmonic motion? In
Chapter 6, we have seen that the concept of
potential energy is possible only for conservative
forces. The spring force F = –kx  is a conservative
force, with associated potential energy
2 1
2U = k x (13.16)
Hence the potential energy of a particle
executing simple harmonic motion is,
U(x)  =   2
21x  k  
         2 2 1cos ( + )2= k A t ω φ  (13.17)
Thus, the potential energy of a particle
executing simple harmonic motion is also
periodic, with period T/2, being zero at the mean
position and maximum at the extreme
displacements.
Reprint 2025-26
OSCILLATIONS 269
It follows from Eqs. (13.15) and (13.17) that
the total energy, E, of the system is,
E  = U + K
2 2 2 2  1 1cos ( + ) + sin ( + )2 2=  k A t  k A t ω φ ω φ
2 2 2 1cos ( + ) + sin ( + )2=  k A t t ω φ ω φ   
Using the familiar trigonometric identity, the
value of the expression in the brackets is unity.
Thus,
2 1
2E =  k A (13.18)
The total mechanical energy of a harmonic
oscillator is thus independent of time as
expected for motion under any conservative
force. The time and displacement dependence
of the potential and kinetic energies of a
linear simple harmonic oscillator are shown
in Fig. 1 3.16.Observe that both kinetic energy and
potential energy in SHM are seen to be always
positive in Fig. 1 3.16. Kinetic energy can, of
course, be never negative, since it is
proportional to the square of speed. Potential
energy is positive by choice of the undermined
constant in potential energy. Both kinetic
energy and potential energy peak twice during
each period of SHM. For x = 0, the energy is
kinetic; at the extremes x = ±A, it is all
potential energy. In the course of motion
between these limits, kinetic energy increases
at the expense of potential energy or
vice-versa.
u Example 13.7   A block whose mass is 1 kg
is fastened to a spring. The spring has a
spring constant of 50 N m–1. The block is
pulled to a distance x = 10 cm from its
equilibrium position at x = 0 on a frictionless
surface from rest at t = 0. Calculate the
kinetic, potential and total energies of the
block when it is 5 cm away from the mean
position.
Answer  The block executes SHM, its angular
frequency, as given by Eq. (13.14b), is
ω =  k
m
 =  50 N m– 1
1kg
             = 7.07 rad s–1
Its displacement at any time t is then given by,
x(t) = 0.1 cos (7.07 t)
Therefore, when the particle is 5 cm away from
the mean position, we have
0.05 = 0.1 cos (7.07 t)Fig. 1 3.16Kinetic energy, potential energy and total
energy as a function of time [shown in (a)]
and displacement [shown in (b)] of a particle
in SHM. The kinetic energy and potential
energy both repeat after a period T/2. The
total energy remains constant at all t or x.
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 270
let it go. The stone executes a to and fro motion,
it is periodic with a period of about two seconds.
We shall show that this periodic motion is
simple harmonic for small displacements fromOrcos (7.07 t) = 0.5 and hence
sin (7.07 t)  =3
2  = 0.866
Then, the velocity of the block at x = 5 cm is
      = 0.1  × 7.07 × 0.866 m s–1
          = 0.61 m s–1
Hence the K.E. of the block,
 
21 =  2  v m
           = ½[1kg  × (0.6123 m s–1 )2 ]
           = 0.19 J
The P .E. of the block,
  
21 =  2x  k  
           = ½(50 N m–1 × 0.05 m  × 0.05 m)
           = 0.0625 J
The total energy of the block at x = 5 cm,
           =  K.E. + P .E.
           =  0.25 J
we also know that at maximum  displacement,
K.E. is zero and hence the total energy of the
system is equal to the P .E. Ther efore, the total
energy of the system,
          = ½(50 N m–1 ×  0.1 m  × 0.1 m )
          = 0.25 J
which is same as the sum of the two energies at
a displacement of 5 cm. This is in conformity
with the principle of conservation of energy.   ⊳
13.8 The Simple Pendulum
It is said that Galileo measured the periods of a
swinging chandelier in a church by his pulse
beats. He observed that the motion of the
chandelier was periodic. The system is a kind
of pendulum. Y ou can also make your own
pendulum by tying a piece of stone to a long
unstretchable thread , approximately 100 cm
long.  Suspend your pendulum from a suitable
support so that it is free to oscillate. Displace
the stone to one side by a small distance and(a)
 (b)
Fig. 13.17 (a) A bob oscillating about its mean
position. (b) The radial force T-mg cos θ
provides centripetal force but no torque
about the support. The tangential force
mg sin θ provides the restoring torque.
the mean position. Consider simple pendulum
— a small bob of mass m tied to an inextensible
massless string of length L. The other end of
the string is fixed to a rigid support. The bob
oscillates in a plane about the vertical line
through the support. Fig. 13.17(a) shows this
system. Fig. 13.17(b) is a kind of ‘free-body’
diagram of the simple pendulum showing the
forces acting on the bob.
Let θ be the angle made by the string with
the vertical. When the bob is at the mean
position, θ = 0
There are only two forces acting on the bob;
the tension T along the string and the vertical
Reprint 2025-26
OSCILLATIONS 271
force due to gravity (=mg). The force mg can be
resolved into the component mg cosθ along the
string and mg sin θ perpendicular to it. Since
the motion of the bob is along a circle of length
L and centre at the support point, the bob has
a radial acceleration ( ω2L) and also a tangental
acceleration; the latter arises since motion along
the arc of the circle is not uniform. The radial
acceleration is provided by the net radial force
T –mg cosθ, while the tangential acceleration is
provided by mg sin θ. It is more convenient to
work with torque about the support since the
radial force gives zero torque. Torque τ about
the support is entirely provided by the tangental
component of force
τ =  –L (mg sinθ) (13.19)
This is the restoring torque that tends to reduce
angular displacement — hence the negative
sign. By Newton’s law of rotational motion,
τ   =  I α (13.20)
where I is the moment of inertia of the system
about the support and α is the angular
acceleration. Thus,
I α = –m g sin θ   L (13.21)
Or,
α  =  sin  m g L  I θ − (13.22)
We can simplify Eq. (13.22) if we assume that
the displacement θ is small. W e know that sin θ
can be expressed as,
sin  ± ...3! 5!  θ θθ θ3 5
  =  − + (13.23)
where θ is in radians.
Now if θ  is small, sin θ can be approximated
by θ and Eq. (13.22) can then be written as,
 α θ   =  −  mgL
I (13.24)
In Table 1 3.1, we have listed the angle θ in
degrees, its equivalent in radians, and the
value of the function sin θ . From this table it
can be seen that for θ as large as 20 degrees,
sin θ is nearly the same as θ expressed
in radians .Table 13.1  sin θ θθ θθ as ma function of angle θ θθ θθ
(degrees) (radians) sin
Equation (13.24) is mathematically, identical to
Eq. (13.11) except that the variable is angular
displacement. Hence we have proved that for
small q, the motion of the bob is simple harmonic.
From Eqs. (13.24) and (13.11),
ω  =  mgL
I 
and
 IT  mgLπ  = 2       (13.25)
Now since the string of the simple pendulum
is massless, the moment of inertia I is simply
mL2. Eq. (13.25) then gives the well-known
formula for time period of a simple pendulum.
LT  gπ  =  2     (13.26)
uExample 13.8  What is the length of a
simple pendulum, which ticks seconds ?
Answer  From Eq. (13.26), the time period of a
simple pendulum is given by,
 LT  gπ  =  2   
From this relation one gets,
2
2 4gTLπ  =   
The time period of a simple pendulum, which
ticks seconds, is 2 s. Therefore, for g = 9.8 m s–2
and T  = 2 s, L is
–2 2
29.8(m s ) 4(s ) 
4  
π× =   
 = 1 m ⊳
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 272
SUMMARY
1. The motion that repeats itself is called periodlic motion.
2. The period T  is the time reequired for one complete oscillation, or cycle. It is related to
the frequency v by,
1Tv=
The frequency  ν of periodic or oscillatory motion is the number of oscillations per
unit time. In the SI, it is measured in hertz :
                      1 hertz = 1 Hz = 1 oscillation per second = 1s–1
3. In simple harmonic motion  (SHM), the displacement x (t) of a particle from its
equilibrium position is given by,
x (t)  = A cos ( ωt + φ ) (displacement),
in which A  is the amplitude  of the displacement, the quantity  ( ωt + φ ) is the phase of
the motion, and φ is the phase constant . The angular frequency  ω is related to the
period and frequency of the motion by ,
                         22     Tπω πν= = (angular frequency).
4. Simple harmonic motion can also be viewed as the projection of uniform circular
motion on the diameter of the circle in which the latter motion occurs.
5. The particle velocity and acceleration during SHM as functions of time are given by,
v (t)  =  – ωA sin ( ωt + φ )            (velocity),
                        a (t)  =  – ω2A cos ( ωt + φ )
                                = –ω2x (t)                            (acceleration),
Thus we see that both velocity and acceleration of a body executing simple harmonic
motion are periodic functions, having the velocity amplitude  vm=ω A  and acceleration
amplitude  am =ω2A, respectively.
6. The force acting in a simple harmonic motion is proportional to the displacement and
is always directed towards the centre of motion.
7. A particle executing simple harmonic motion has, at any time, kinetic energy
K = ½ mv2  and potential energy U = ½ kx2.  If no friction is present the mechanical
energy of the system, E = K + U  always remains constant even though K and U change
with time.
8. A particle of mass m oscillating under the influence of Hooke’s law restoring force
given by F = – k x  exhibits simple harmonic motion with
ω k
m=(angular frequency)
2mT kπ= (period)
Such a system is also called a linear oscillator .
9. The motion of a simple pendulum swinging through small angles is approximately
simple harmonic. The period of oscillation is given by,
2LTgπ=
Reprint 2025-26
OSCILLATIONS 273
POINTS TO PONDER
1. The period T is the  least time after which motion repeats itself.  Thus, motion repeats
itself after nT wher e n is an integer .
2. Every periodic motion is not simple harmonic motion. Only that periodic motion
governed by the force law F = – k x is simple harmonic.
3. Circular motion can arise due to an inverse-square law force (as in planetary motion)
as well as due to simple har monic for ce in two dimensions equal to: – mω2r.  In the
latter case, the phases of motion, in two perpendicular directions ( x and y) must differ
by π/2. Thus, for example, a particle subject to a force  – mω2r with initial position (0,
A) and velocity ( ωA, 0) will move uniformly in a circle of radius A.
4. For linear simple harmonic motion with a given ω, two initial conditions are necessary
and sufficient to determine the motion completely.  The  initial  conditions may be (i)
initial position and initial velocity or (ii) amplitude and phase or (iii) energy
and phase.
5. From point 4 above, given  amplitude or energy, phase of motion is determined by the
initial position or initial velocity.
6. A combination of two simple harmonic motions with arbitrary amplitudes and phases
is not necessarily periodic.  It is periodic only if frequency of one motion is an integral
multiple of the other’s fr equency.  However , a periodic motion can always be expr essed
as a sum of infinite number of harmonic motions with appropriate amplitudes.
7. The period of SHM does not depend on amplitude or energy or the phase constant.
Contrast this with the periods of planetary orbits under gravitation (Kepler’s third law).
8. The motion of a simple pendulum is simple harmonic for small angular displacement.
9. For motion of a particle to be simple harmonic, its displacement x must be expressible
in either of the following forms :
x = A  cos ωt  +  B sin ωt
x = A cos ( ωt + α), x =  B sin ( ωt + β)
The three forms are completely equivalent (any one can be expressed in terms of any
other two forms).
Thus, damped simple harmonic motion is not strictly simple harmonic. It is
approximately so only for time intervals much less than 2m/b  where b is the damping
constant.
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 274
Exercises
13.1 Which of the following examples represent periodic motion?
(a) A swimmer completing one (return) trip from one bank of a river to the other
and back.
(b) A freely suspended bar magnet displaced from its N-S direction and released.
(c) A hydrogen molecule rotating about its cent re of mass.
(d) An arrow released from a bow.
13.2 Which of the following examples represent (nearly) simple harmonic motion and
which represent periodic but not simple harmonic motion?
(a) the rotation of earth about its axis.
(b) motion of an oscillating mercury column in a U-tube.
(c) motion of a ball bearing inside a smooth curved bowl, when released from a
point slightly above the lower most point.
(d) general vibrations of a polyatomic molecule about its equilibrium position.
13.3 Fig. 13.18 depicts four x-t plots for linear motion of a particle. Which of the plots
represent periodic motion? What is the period of motion (in case of periodic motion) ?
Fig. 18.18
Reprint 2025-26
OSCILLATIONS 275
13.4 Which of the following functions of time represent (a) simple harmonic, (b) periodic
but not simple harmonic, and (c) non-periodic motion? Give period for each case of
periodic motion ( ω is any positive constant):
(a) sin ωt – cos ωt
(b) sin3 ωt
(c) 3 cos ( π/4 – 2 ωt)
(d) cos ωt + cos 3 ωt + cos 5 ωt
(e) exp (– ω2t2)
(f) 1 + ωt + ω2t2
13.5 A particle is in linear simple harmonic motion between two points, A and B, 10 cm
apart. Take the direction from A to B as the positive direction and give the signs of
velocity, acceleration and force on the particle when it is
(a) at the end A,
(b) at the end B,
(c) at the mid-point of AB going towards A,
(d) at 2 cm away from B going towards A,
(e) at 3 cm away from A going towards B, and
(f) at 4 cm away from B going towards A.
13.6 Which of the following relationships between the acceleration a and the displacement
x of a particle involve simple harmonic motion?
(a) a = 0.7 x
(b) a = –200 x2
(c) a = –10 x
(d) a = 100 x3
13.7 The motion of a particle executing simple harmonic motion is described by the
displacement function,
                 x(t) = A cos ( ωt + φ ).
If the initial ( t = 0) position of the particle is 1 cm and its initial velocity is ω cm/s,
what are its amplitude and initial phase angle ? The angular frequency of the particle
is π s–1. If instead of the cosine function, we choose the sine function to describe the
SHM : x = B sin  (ωt + α), what are the amplitude and initial phase of the particle
with the above initial conditions.
13.8 A spring balance has a scale that reads from 0 to 50 kg. The length of the scale is 20
cm. A body suspended from this balance, when displaced and released, oscillates
with a period of 0.6 s. What is the weight of the body ?
13.9 A spring having with a spring constant 1200 N m–1 is mounted on a horizontal table
as shown in Fig. 13.19. A mass of 3 kg is attached to the free end of the spring. The
mass is then pulled sideways to a distance of 2.0 cm and released.
Fig. 13.19
Determine (i) the frequency of oscillations, (ii)  maximum acceleration of the mass,
and (iii) the maximum speed of the mass.
Reprint 2025-26
PHYSICS 276
13.10 In Exercise 13.9, let us take the position of mass when the spring is unstreched as
x = 0, and the direction from left to right as the positive direction of
x-axis. Give x as a function of time t for the oscillating mass if at the moment we
start the stopwatch ( t = 0), the mass is
(a) at the mean position,
(b) at the maximum stretched position, and
(c) at the maximum compressed position.
In what way do these functions for SHM dif fer fr om each other , in fr equency, in
amplitude or the initial phase?
13.11 Figures 13.20 correspond to two circular motions. The radius of the circle, the
period of revolution, the initial position, and the sense of revolution (i.e. clockwise
or anti-clockwise) are indicated on each figure.
Fig. 13.20
Obtain the corresponding simple harmonic motions of the x-projection of the radius
vector of the r evolving particle P , in each case.
13.12 Plot the corresponding reference circle for each of the following simple harmonic
motions. Indicate the initial ( t =0) position of the particle, the radius of the circle,
and the angular speed of the rotating particle. For simplicity, the sense of rotation
may be fixed to be anticlockwise in every case: ( x is in cm and t is in s).
(a) x = –2 sin (3 t + π/3)
(b) x = cos ( π/6 – t)
(c) x = 3 sin (2 πt + π/4)
(d) x = 2 cos πt
13.13 Figure 13.21(a) shows a spring of force constant k clamped rigidly at one end and a
mass m attached to its free end. A force F applied at the free end stretches the
spring. Figure 13.21 (b) shows the same spring with both ends free and attached to
a mass m at either end. Each end of the spring in Fig. 13.21(b) is stretched by the
same for ce F.
Fig. 13.21
(a) What is the maximum extension of the spring in the two cases ?
(b) If the mass in Fig. (a) and the two masses in Fig. (b) are released, what is the
period of oscillation in each case ?
Reprint 2025-26
OSCILLATIONS 277
13.14 The piston in the cylinder head of a locomotive has a stroke (twice the amplitude)
of 1.0 m. If the piston moves with simple harmonic motion with an angular frequency
of 200 rad/min, what is its maximum speed ?
13.15 The acceleration due to gravity on the surface of moon is 1.7 m s–2. What is the time
period of a simple pendulum on the surface of moon if its time period on the surface
of earth is 3.5 s ? ( g onthe surface of earth is 9.8 m s–2)
13.16 A simple pendulum of length l and having a bob of mass M is suspended in a car .
The car is moving on a circular track of radius R with a uniform speed v. If the
pendulum makes small oscillations in a radial direction about its equilibrium
position, what will be its time period ?
13.17 A cylindrical piece of cork of density of base area A and height h floats in a liquid of
density ρl. The cork is depressed slightly and then released. Show that the cork
oscillates up and down simple harmonically with a period
                                     Th
g1=2πρ
ρ
where ρ is the density of cork. (Ignore damping due to viscosity of the liquid).
13.18 One end of a U-tube containing mercury is connected to a suction pump and the
other end to atmosphere. A small pressure difference is maintained between the
two columns. Show that, when the suction pump is removed, the column of mercury
in the U-tube executes simple harmonic motion.
Reprint 2025-26
